Endophyte Metabarcode Library  

Samples of leaves were processed to allow for DNA extraction and next-generation sequencing of the ITS region of fungal endophytes. We did all leaf DNA extractions in the lab at Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan. First, the surfaces of fresh leaves were washed gently with tap water to reduce epiphytes. Then, one square centimeter leaf segments were cut from each of the three leaves collected per sampling plot and surface-sterilized by immersion in 70% ethanol for 30 sec, full-strength bleach (5% sodium hypochlorite) for 1 min, an additional 30 sec in ethanol, then rinsed thoroughly in sterile deionized water. Leaf tissues were disrupted via bead beating using three 5 mm stainless steel beads for an 80 s agitation cycle at 3450 oscillations/minute. DNA was extracted from homogenized leaf tissues using a Qiagen DNeasy 96 Plant Kit following the manufacturer's instructions.  Extracted DNA was shipped overnight on wet ice to our lab at the University of Oregon, where a metabarcode sequencing library of the fungal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the rRNA gene was prepared. Library preparation followed Meadow et al. (2013) , with slight modifications. Briefly, the ITS region was amplified using a modified fungal specific ITS1F/ITS2 primer set adapted from Mueller et al. (2014) (5"-CTTGGTCATTTAGAGGAAGTAA-3" / 5"-GCTGCGTTCTTCATCGATGC-3") (White et al. 1990, Gardes and Bruns 1993) through a two-step custom Illumina preparation protocol. We used a split-barcode system, with unique combinations of six base pair barcodes appended to both the forward and reverse primers; this allowed for fewer total primers to be synthesized, while maintaining a large number of unique possible combinations (Gloor et al. 2010). Primer secondary structures were validated using PrimerProspector (Walters & Caporaso et al. 2011). The first PCR step used forward and reverse primers that contained barcodes and partial Illumina adapters; the second PCR step appended the rest of the Illumina adapters, and barcodes were combined into unique 12 base-pair sequences in silico using paired-end reads (full primer sequences are available in the Supplemental Materials).  All first-step PCRs were amplified in triplicate, and then pooled before second-step PCR. First-step PCR (25 μL total reaction volume) was performed using 2.5 μL 10X high fidelity PCR buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.125 μL dNTPs (10 mM, Sigma-Aldrich), 1.25 μL MgCl2 (50 mM, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.25 μL Platinumª Taq high fidelity polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 14.875 μL certified nucleic-acid free water, 0.5 μL forward primer, 0.5 μL reverse primer, and 5 μL template DNA using the following conditions: initial denaturation for 2 min at 98 °C; 20 cycles of 30 s at 98 °C, 30 s at 60 °C, and 45 s at 72 °C; and 72 °C for 5 min for final extension. The products of first-step PCR triplicates were pooled and cleaned with DNA Clean & Concentrator (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA) following the manufacturer's instructions; 10 μL of 3M NaOAc (pH 5.2) was added to decrease the pH of the pooled reactions and facilitate efficient binding to the spin column, and all samples were eluted using 10 μL of the provided elution buffer. Second-step PCR reactions used a single primer pair to add the remaining Illumina adaptor sequence to the ends of the concentrated amplicons from the first-step PCR. Second-step PCR (25 μL total reaction volume) included the same reagents as above, and used 5 μL of the pooled and concentrated first-step PCR products as template; the conditions were as follows: 2 min denaturation at 98 °C; 14 cycles of 30 s at 98 °C, 30 s at 58°C, and 45 s at 72 °C; and 3 min at 72 °C for final extension. Equal volumes of each sample were then pooled, and the library was size-selected by gel electrophoresis: the wide gel bands centered at ~275bp (175-400bp were removed, to account for the variation present at the ITS1 locus across the kingdom Fungi) were extracted and concentrated using the ZR-96 Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit (ZYMO Research, Irvine, CA), following manufacturer's instructions. DNA concentration was quantified using a Qubit Fluoromoeter (Invitrogen, NY). Samples were sent to the IBEST Genomics Resources Core at the University of Idaho (Moscow, ID; http://www.ibest.uidaho.edu/), and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform as paired-end reads after qPCR validation with Illumina-specific primers.
